Draft revised SWG charter for review (#145)
zarr-developers/geozarr-spec: geozarr_swg_charter.md

Reviewer: Impossible not to reference this here for internal consumption: https://xkcd.com/927/

Category: OGC® Standards Working Group Charter

Authors: Max Jones

</div>

<div align="center">

# OGC GeoZarr Standards Working Group Charter

**Copyright notice**

Copyright © 2026 Open Geospatial Consortium

To obtain additional rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/

</div>

---

To: OGC members & interested parties

The OGC members listed below have proposed a re-chartering of the OGC GeoZarr Standards Working Group (GeoZarr SWG). The GeoZarr SWG seeks a re-charter to better reflect the relationship between GeoZarr, the Zarr Conventions Framework, and the NetCDF CF SWG. The SWG proposal provided in this document meets the requirements of the OGC Technical Committee (TC) Policies and Procedures.

The SWG name, statement of purpose, scope, list of deliverables, audience, and language specified in the proposal will constitute the SWG's official charter. Technical discussions may occur no sooner than the SWG's first meeting.

This SWG will operate under the OGC IPR Policy. The eligibility requirements for becoming a participant in the SWG at the first meeting (see details below) are that:

> - You must be an employee of an OGC member organization or an individual member of OGC;

Reviewer 2: Careful, you also have external members. You need a note here that not only OGC members, but also Zarr community members

> GeoZarr serves three families of geospatial data, with Zarr and geospatial representation as the common thread: data served well today by the CF (Climate and Forecast) Metadata Conventions in netCDF (climate and forecast model output, ocean models, in-situ observations, and satellite swaths); data served well today by GeoTIFF and Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF (imagery and other regularly gridded data with affine georeferencing, coordinate reference system metadata, and overviews); and novel geospatial applications not represented well by either lineage, such as discrete global grid systems (DGGS) and vector data cubes. GeoZarr accomplishes this by standardizing a set of Zarr conventions that are well-designed, composable, and mature, such that they can be used together to fulfill those diverse requirements within the geospatial domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GeoZarr aims to support a wide variety of geospatial data by encoding their semantics through attribute conventions in Zarr groups and arrays. It currently serves two "families" of geospatial data: (1) data encoded using the CF (Climate and Forecast) Metadata Conventions in netCDF (climate and forecast model output, ocean models, in-situ observations, and satellite swaths, among others); and (2) data in GeoTIFF and Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF (imagery and other regularly gridded data with affine georeferencing, coordinate reference system metadata, and overviews). Novel and emerging geospatial applications requiring different encodings, such as discrete global grid systems (DGGS) and vector data cubes, are supported as well. GeoZarr accomplishes this by standardizing a set of mature Zarr conventions that are composable such that they can be used together to fulfill the diverse requirements within the geospatial domain.
```

Author: Can you offer some more information about the reasoning behind this suggestion? It reads to me as a rewriting for personal wording preferences, but I'm curious if there's a more substantive change here that I'm missing.

Reviewer: Nothing to do with personal preferences. In the original text you write about "three families", one of which is "novel" and (potentially) covering a wide range of features that are not known at this time - use of "novel" as a grouping is not very useful therefore. Looking at the two remaining "families" this ties down the charter to the current situation, which I do not think is a good proposition. So my proposed new language makes the paragraph more neutral by stating an open-ended ambition - "support a wide variety", which is appropriate for a charter document - and then giving some specific targets: CF community, GeoTIFF community, and being open for novel approaches.

> The table below defines the scope of work for this charter: the set of capabilities, or concerns a geospatial dataset may need to describe, that the SWG may standardize during this charter period. The table targets the dominant use cases within the three families above rather than every conceivable one; work on capabilities beyond this scope requires a revision to this charter. Inclusion of a capability in scope does not commit the SWG to delivering it: deliverables are defined in Section 4 and sequenced through the SWG Task approval process defined in the OGC TC Policies and Procedures.

Reviewer: The table is an enumeration which does not really fit well in a charter document. What is needed here is statement of principle on what is eligible for GeoZarr, like "Conventions eligible for inclusion in GeoZarr have to support the description of geospatial data such that every element of the data can be located in a defined spatial reference frame, and fully described in terms of its properties, meaning, provenance, application and use." Another enumeration runs the risk of becoming outdated pretty quickly. The table as such would work better in a work plan document.

Author: I like the idea of an eligibility principle and added one in https://github.com/zarr-developers/geozarr-spec/pull/145/commits/e2f139af4214db1c446aaf4f0119ffd88b5f26aa.

I don't agree with the table is ill-suited for the charter. I think that defining our scope of work is one of the most useful components of this recharter exercise, and including what capabilities will be supported is an important part of that definition. Let's get more input from others on the table.

> Each capability is realized by one or more Zarr conventions. This charter deliberately does not name the conventions that will realize each capability, nor the order in which capabilities will be addressed: conventions are proposed, evaluated against the assessment criteria in Section 1, and incorporated into GeoZarr deliverables through the processes in Section 4. Where more than one candidate convention addresses a capability, the SWG's evaluation process determines which are incorporated. Each capability is classified as **domain-agnostic** (its concepts apply to any n-dimensional array, so the realizing convention belongs to the broader Zarr Conventions Framework and is reusable outside the geospatial domain) or **geospatial** (it encodes Earth-referencing, such as a coordinate reference system, planetary coordinate, or geographic feature). A few capabilities split into a domain-agnostic mechanism carrying a geospatial vocabulary; these are marked accordingly. The last column cross-references the notes in Section 3.1, which map each capability to the prior standards and specifications it draws on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each capability is realized by one or more Zarr conventions. This charter deliberately does not name the conventions that will realize each capability, nor the order in which capabilities will be addressed: conventions are proposed, evaluated against the assessment criteria in Section 1, and incorporated into GeoZarr deliverables through the processes in Section 4. The SWG's evaluation process determines which are incorporated. Each capability is classified as either **domain-agnostic** (its concepts apply to any n-dimensional array, so the realizing convention belongs to the broader Zarr Conventions Framework and is reusable outside the geospatial domain) or **geospatial** (it encodes Earth-referencing, such as a coordinate reference system, planetary coordinate, or geographic feature). A few capabilities split into a domain-agnostic mechanism carrying a geospatial vocabulary; these are marked accordingly.
```

Author: Thanks, I applied the cleaner classification of "domain-agnostic, geospatial, or a domain-agnostic mechanism carrying a geospatial vocabulary" in https://github.com/zarr-developers/geozarr-spec/pull/145/commits/ea7fa85c0c6e03aca565fdcf4399f190005f775e.

I kept the earlier working about multiple candidate conventions because it records how the SWG handles the case where more than one convention targets the same capability (via the evaluation process). This component is essential for keeping the standard simple and scope balanced, which has been repeatedly raised as a lesson from other standards efforts (e.g., STAC, CF). I also kept the final sentence because it explains the Prior art column.

| Capability | Description | Classification | Prior art |
|---|---|---|---|

> | Coordinate reference systems | Coordinate reference system description via EPSG code, WKT2, or PROJJSON, including vertical datums. | Geospatial | [§3.1](#note-crs) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Coordinate reference systems | Coordinate reference system description via EPSG code, WKT2, or PROJJSON, including vertical and temporal datums. | Geospatial | [§3.1](#note-crs) |
```
